# Learning Experiences

The course will include a variety of learning experiences contingent upon
regular attendance and dedicated participation. Because creative inquiry is an
interactive process, much of the class time will be devoted to group
experiential exercises, individual reflective tasks, collaborative endeavors,
and practical assignments.

We will create a collaborative environment in this class. We are not
going to cobble together the type of group one often hears about in
the arts and education: competitive, cut-throat, critical. Instead, we
will direct our efforts toward building upon the individual strengths
of each participant, finding ways for each of us to be self-reflective
in terms of assessing our work together, discovering a means of
protecting the quality and integrity of our contributions. The
creative spirit is remarkably persistent, yet it is also fragile,
especially at its inception, and we must be conscious of this
fragility. Think about it: did you not experience, as a child, the
strangulation of your creativity in school, by way of a culture of
insensitive peers or teachers? Why do you think hardly anyone feels
comfortable singing in public, or dancing, or drawing, or reading
their written work to others? We have, most of us, been the victims of
inappropriate feedback and judgment. We have to be careful about this,
in our course, so that we do not harm one another.

### Skill Development

Perhaps it’s most helpful to come at creative writing in terms of a
skill set. Thinking and acting creatively is really a matter of
looking at the process of learning. Instead of focusing on the
“content” we might ask questions about how we identify, interpret,
create, and communicate this content. These are process
questions. Below are some examples of the kinds of considerations we
will explore during our process.

#### Creating a “Good” Question

The questions we ask tell us a lot about how we think, the assumptions
we make and what we’re willing to accept as answers. What is a “good”
question? How do questions emerge? Where do they come from? How does a
creative question evolve? How do we hold space for our questions and
how do they “work” on us? We will discuss these questions about
questions, and see where they lead us.

#### Critical Thinking and Crap Detection

We are often quick to believe what we read and what we hear,
especially when it comes from sources that we deem “authoritative.”
Teachers, journal articles, media, books, professors, parents, and
peers all have their own take on what is correct and true. Who is
right? How do we know what we’re hearing is not false or misconstrued?
What is true? From what perspective is it true? What other
perspectives can be taken that are also true? What evidence is being
used to support the claim? Is the evidence appropriate for the kind of
claim being made? What ideologies, assumptions and beliefs are at
play? How do they impact the interpretation of “facts”? And what are
facts, anyway?

#### Finding, Using and Evaluating Resources

Resources are what we use to accomplish something. We have internal
resources such as courage, empathy, compassion, self-awareness,
mindfulness and so on to help us create, learn and work with the
challenges of life. People in our lives such as teachers, peers,
mentors, and guides also have skills, experience, and knowledge that
can potentially help us accomplish our goals. As well, the internet,
books and other sources of information are valuable resources. How do
we know what resources we need to accomplish a goal? Are they
internal, interpersonal, or codified? What are the means by which we
access these resources? How do we know if the sources we’re accessing
are good or the right ones for our goal? How do we evaluate their
quality?

#### Communication (speaking, listening, writing, performing)

Language is expressed verbally and non-verbally in a particular
relational context of culture, values and past experience. Our ability
to translate ideas into words and actions, move an audience into a
compelling dialogue, or simply be present to someone else, requires an
awareness of these contexts and good communication skills. How does a
mindful and embodied presence shape how we speak and listen? How do we
write articulately, persuasively, and with accuracy and authenticity?
How do our values shape the way we communicate?

#### Following Through on a Process

Any creative process that generates new forms of knowledge (arts,
sciences and otherwise) typically has a number of phases. These phases
don’t always happen in order and are not necessarily distinct events,
but it’s helpful to think about the ecocycle of creative work. First,
there is the discovery of interest or passion. The question or idea
may not even be fully formed at this point, but there’s a spark that
feels like it’s worth following. Next, we immerse ourselves in the
topic. We read, have conversations, mess with different
approaches. Basically, we commit to learning as much as we can about
our passion. At some point we have consciously consumed as much as we
can about the topic and we need a break from thinking about it. We let
the questions incubate and trust that they are working under the
surface in the dark soil. “Spring” eventually comes, perhaps after a
long “winter”. Insights and breakthroughs emerge. Little shoots pop up
out of the soil. We are careful to not jump to conclusions but instead
create space for ideas and insights to slowly emerge through a process
of articulating and capturing. In the last stages, we bring all the
elements together in a creative synthesis and share the bounty of our
harvest.

What is happening at each stage of the creative process? What are the
challenges of each stage? How do we support the work that needs to be
done in each phase? How do we manage our time in such a way that we
are able to do creative work sustainably? Doing the preparatory work,
looking for and taking opportunities, experimenting, being realistic
about time, taking care of mind/body/heart/soul, and attending to
other responsibilities all require good skills in managing our
time. And how do we balance these various factors?

#### Self-Awareness and Self-Evaluation

Growing personally and professionally is a process that has no end
point. Although growth is challenging and at times painful, growth is
critical to finding meaning and vitality in our life and work. Living
systems that come to an equilibrium with their environment — that
stick with the status quo and are content living in their comfort zone
— do not live for very long! For humans, growth requires
self-evaluation, which in turn involves looking at our strengths and
vulnerabilities, considering the evidence and feedback in these areas,
identifying where we wish to grow, creating a game plan for how we
plan to address our vulnerabilities, and celebrating our successes.

Self-assessment involves asking questions such about how we wish to
grow. What is involved in growing in a given area? What opportunities
can we find and/or create to grow? How do we take responsibility for
working on ourselves? How does the feedback from others and the
results of our attempts to develop tell us how we are doing? How do we
decide what to do with the feedback we receive from others?
